16–4 Electrical technology

When Faraday first made public his remarkable discovery that a changing magnetic flux produces an emf, he was asked (as anyone is asked when he discovers a new fact of nature), “What is the use of it?” All he had found was the oddity that a tiny current was produced when he moved a wire near a magnet. Of what possible “use” could that be? His answer was: “What is the use of a newborn baby?”

Yet think of the tremendous practical applications his discovery has led to. What we have been describing are not just toys but examples chosen in most cases to represent the principle of some practical machine. For instance, the rotating ring in the turning field is an induction motor. There are, of course, some differences between it and a practical induction motor. The ring has a very small torque; it can be stopped with your hand. For a good motor, things have to be put together more intimately: there shouldn’t be so much “wasted” magnetic field out in the air. First, the field is concentrated by using iron. We have not discussed how iron does that, but iron can make the magnetic field tens of thousands of times stronger than copper coils alone could do. Second, the gaps between the pieces of iron are made small; to do that, some iron is even built into the rotating ring. Everything is arranged so as to get the greatest forces and the greatest efficiency—that is, conversion of electrical power to mechanical power—until the “ring” can no longer be held still by your hand.

This problem of closing the gaps and making the thing work in the most practical way is engineering. It requires serious study of design problems, although there are no new basic principles from which the forces are obtained. But there is a long way to go from the basic principles to a practical and economic design. Yet it is just such careful engineering design that has made possible such a tremendous thing as Boulder Dam and all that goes with it.

What is Boulder Dam? A huge river is stopped by a concrete wall. But what a wall it is! Shaped with a perfect curve that is very carefully worked out so that the least possible amount of concrete will hold back a whole river. It thickens at the bottom in that wonderful shape that the artists like but that the engineers can appreciate because they know that such thickening is related to the increase of pressure with the depth of the water. But we are getting away from electricity.

Then the water of the river is diverted into a huge pipe. That’s a nice engineering accomplishment in itself. The pipe feeds the water into a “waterwheel”—a huge turbine—and makes wheels turn. (Another engineering feat.) But why turn wheels? They are coupled to an exquisitely intricate mess of copper and iron, all twisted and interwoven. With two parts—one that turns and one that doesn’t. All a complex intermixture of a few materials, mostly iron and copper but also some paper and shellac for insulation. A revolving monster thing. A generator. Somewhere out of the mess of copper and iron come a few special pieces of copper. The dam, the turbine, the iron, the copper, all put there to make something special happen to a few bars of copper—an emf. Then the copper bars go a little way and circle for several times around another piece of iron in a transformer; then their job is done.

But around that same piece of iron curls another cable of copper which has no direct connection whatsoever to the bars from the generator; they have just been influenced because they passed near it—to get their emf. The transformer converts the power from the relatively low voltages required for the efficient design of the generator to the very high voltages that are best for efficient transmission of electrical energy over long cables.

And everything must be enormously efficient—there can be no waste, no loss. Why? The power for a metropolis is going through. If a small fraction were lost—one or two percent—think of the energy left behind! If one percent of the power were left in the transformer, that energy would need to be taken out somehow. If it appeared as heat, it would quickly melt the whole thing. There is, of course, some small inefficiency, but all that is required are a few pumps which circulate some oil through a radiator to keep the transformer from heating up.

Out of the Boulder Dam come a few dozen rods of copper—long, long, long rods of copper perhaps the thickness of your wrist that go for hundreds of miles in all directions. Small rods of copper carrying the power of a giant river. Then the rods are split to make more rods … then to more transformers … sometimes to great generators which recreate the current in another form … sometimes to engines turning for big industrial purposes … to more transformers … then more splitting and spreading … until finally the river is spread throughout the whole city—turning motors, making heat, making light, working gadgetry. The miracle of hot lights from cold water over 600 miles away—all done with specially arranged pieces of copper and iron. Large motors for rolling steel, or tiny motors for a dentist’s drill. Thousands of little wheels, turning in response to the turning of the big wheel at Boulder Dam. Stop the big wheel, and all the wheels stop; the lights go out. They really are connected.

Yet there is more. The same phenomena that take the tremendous power of the river and spread it through the countryside, until a few drops of the river are running the dentist’s drill, come again into the building of extremely fine instruments … for the detection of incredibly small amounts of current … for the transmission of voices, music, and pictures … for computers … for automatic machines of fantastic precision.

All this is possible because of carefully designed arrangements of copper and iron—efficiently created magnetic fields … blocks of rotating iron six feet in diameter whirling with clearances of 1/16 of an inch … careful proportions of copper for the optimum efficiency … strange shapes all serving a purpose, like the curve of the dam.

If some future archaeologist uncovers Boulder Dam, we may guess that he would admire the beauty of its curves. But also the explorers from some great future civilizations will look at the generators and transformers and say: “Notice that every iron piece has a beautifully efficient shape. Think of the thought that has gone into every piece of copper!”

This is the power of engineering and the careful design of our electrical technology. There has been created in the generator something which exists nowhere else in nature. It is true that there are forces of induction in other places. Certainly in some places around the sun and stars there are effects of electromagnetic induction. Perhaps also (though it’s not certain) the magnetic field of the earth is maintained by an analog of an electric generator that operates on circulating currents in the interior of the earth. But nowhere have there been pieces put together with moving parts to generate electrical power as is done in the generator—with great efficiency and regularity.

You may think that designing electric generators is no longer an interesting subject, that it is a dead subject because they are all designed. Almost perfect generators or motors can be taken from a shelf. Even if this were true, we can admire the wonderful accomplishment of a problem solved to near perfection. But there remain as many unfinished problems. Even generators and transformers are returning as problems. It is likely that the whole field of low temperatures and superconductors will soon be applied to the problem of electric power distribution. With a radically new factor in the problem, new optimum designs will have to be created. Power networks of the future may have little resemblance to those of today.

You can see that there is an endless number of applications and problems that one could take up while studying the laws of induction. The study of the design of electrical machinery is a life work in itself. We cannot go very far in that direction, but we should be aware of the fact that when we have discovered the law of induction, we have suddenly connected our theory to an enormous practical development. We must, however, leave that subject to the engineers and applied scientists who are interested in working out the details of particular applications. Physics only supplies the base—the basic principles that apply, no matter what. (We have not yet completed the base, because we have yet to consider in detail the properties of iron and of copper. Physics has something to say about these as we will see a little later!)

Modern electrical technology began with Faraday’s discoveries. The useless baby developed into a prodigy and changed the face of the earth in ways its proud father could never have imagined.
