SOURCE: Feynman Lectures on Physics, Volume I, Chapter 3
LANGUAGE: en
SECTION: 3–4 Astronomy
SOURCE_URL: https://www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu/I_03.html

# 3–4 Astronomy

In this rapid-fire explanation of the whole world, we must now turn to astronomy. Astronomy is older than physics. In fact, it got physics started by showing the beautiful simplicity of the motion of the stars and planets, the understanding of which was thebeginningof physics. But the most remarkable discovery in all of astronomy is thatthe stars are made of atoms of the same kind as those on the earth.1How was this done? Atoms liberate light which has definite frequencies, something like the timbre of a musical instrument, which has definite pitches or frequencies of sound. When we are listening to several different tones we can tell them apart, but when we look with our eyes at a mixture of colors we cannot tell the parts from which it was made, because the eye is nowhere near as discerning as the ear in this connection. However, with a spectroscope wecananalyze the frequencies of the light waves and in this way we can see the very tunes of the atoms that are in the different stars. As a matter of fact, two of the chemical elements were discovered on a star before they were discovered on the earth. Helium was discovered on the sun, whence its name, and technetium was discovered in certain cool stars. This, of course, permits us to make headway in understanding the stars, because they are made of the same kinds of atoms which are on the earth. Now we know a great deal about the atoms, especially concerning their behavior under conditions of high temperature but not very great density, so that we can analyze by statistical mechanics the behavior of the stellar substance. Even though we cannot reproduce the conditions on the earth, using the basic physical laws we often can tell precisely, or very closely, what will happen. So it is that physics aids astronomy. Strange as it may seem, we understand the distribution of matter in the interior of the sun far better than we understand the interior of the earth. What goes oninsidea star is better understood than one might guess from the difficulty of having to look at a little dot of light through a telescope, because we cancalculatewhat the atoms in the stars should do in most circumstances.
One of the most impressive discoveries was the origin of the energy of the stars, that makes them continue to burn. One of the men who discovered this was out with his girlfriend the night after he realized thatnuclear reactionsmust be going on in the stars in order to make them shine. She said “Look at how pretty the stars shine!” He said “Yes, and right now I am the only man in the world who knowswhythey shine.” She merely laughed at him. She was not impressed with being out with the only man who, at that moment, knew why stars shine. Well, it is sad to be alone, but that is the way it is in this world.
It is the nuclear “burning” of hydrogen which supplies the energy of the sun; the hydrogen is converted into helium. Furthermore, ultimately, the manufacture of various chemical elements proceeds in the centers of the stars, from hydrogen. The stuff of whichweare made, was “cooked” once, in a star, and spit out. How do we know? Because there is a clue. The proportion of the different isotopes—how much C \(^{12}\) , how much C \(^{13}\) , etc., is something which is never changed bychemicalreactions, because the chemical reactions are so much the same for the two. The proportions are purely the result ofnuclearreactions. By looking at the proportions of the isotopes in the cold, dead ember which we are, we can discover what thefurnacewas like in which the stuff of which we are made was formed. That furnace was like the stars, and so it is very likely that our elements were “made” in the stars and spit out in the explosions which we call novae and supernovae. Astronomy is so close to physics that we shall study many astronomical things as we go along.
