7–1 Methods for finding the electrostatic field

This chapter is a continuation of our consideration of the characteristics of electric fields in various particular situations. We shall first describe some of the more elaborate methods for solving problems with conductors. It is not expected that these more advanced methods can be mastered at this time. Yet it may be of interest to have some idea about the kinds of problems that can be solved, using techniques that may be learned in more advanced courses. Then we take up two examples in which the charge distribution is neither fixed nor is carried by a conductor, but instead is determined by some other law of physics.

As we found in Chapter 6, the problem of the electrostatic field is fundamentally simple when the distribution of charges is specified; it requires only the evaluation of an integral. When there are conductors present, however, complications arise because the charge distribution on the conductors is not initially known; the charge must distribute itself on the surface of the conductor in such a way that the conductor is an equipotential. The solution of such problems is neither direct nor simple.

We have looked at an indirect method of solving such problems, in which we find the equipotentials for some specified charge distribution and replace one of them by a conducting surface. In this way we can build up a catalog of special solutions for conductors in the shapes of spheres, planes, etc. The use of images, described in Chapter 6, is an example of an indirect method. We shall describe another in this chapter.

If the problem to be solved does not belong to the class of problems for which we can construct solutions by the indirect method, we are forced to solve the problem by a more direct method. The mathematical problem of the direct method is the solution of Laplace’s equation,

\nabla^2\phi=0, (7.1)

subject to the condition that \phi is a suitable constant on certain boundaries—the surfaces of the conductors. Problems which involve the solution of a differential field equation subject to certain boundary conditions are called boundary-value problems. They have been the object of considerable mathematical study. In the case of conductors having complicated shapes, there are no general analytical methods. Even such a simple problem as that of a charged cylindrical metal can closed at both ends—a beer can—presents formidable mathematical difficulties. It can be solved only approximately, using numerical methods. The only general methods of solution are numerical.

There are a few problems for which Eq. ( 7.1) can be solved directly. For example, the problem of a charged conductor having the shape of an ellipsoid of revolution can be solved exactly in terms of known special functions. The solution for a thin disc can be obtained by letting the ellipsoid become infinitely oblate. In a similar manner, the solution for a needle can be obtained by letting the ellipsoid become infinitely prolate. However, it must be stressed that the only direct methods of general applicability are the numerical techniques.

Boundary-value problems can also be solved by measurements of a physical analog. Laplace’s equation arises in many different physical situations: in steady-state heat flow, in irrotational fluid flow, in current flow in an extended medium, and in the deflection of an elastic membrane. It is frequently possible to set up a physical model which is analogous to an electrical problem which we wish to solve. By the measurement of a suitable analogous quantity on the model, the solution to the problem of interest can be determined. An example of the analog technique is the use of the electrolytic tank for the solution of two-dimensional problems in electrostatics. This works because the differential equation for the potential in a uniform conducting medium is the same as it is for a vacuum.

There are many physical situations in which the variations of the physical fields in one direction are zero, or can be neglected in comparison with the variations in the other two directions. Such problems are called two-dimensional; the field depends on two coordinates only. For example, if we place a long charged wire along the z -axis, then for points not too far from the wire the electric field depends on x and y , but not on z ; the problem is two-dimensional. Since in a two-dimensional problem \frac{\partial \phi}{\partial z}=0 , the equation for \phi in free space is

\frac{\partial^2\phi}{\partial x^2}+ \frac{\partial^2\phi}{\partial y^2}=0. (7.2)

Because the two-dimensional equation is comparatively simple, there is a wide range of conditions under which it can be solved analytically. There is, in fact, a very powerful indirect mathematical technique which depends on a theorem from the mathematics of functions of a complex variable, and which we will now describe.
