SOURCE: Feynman Lectures on Physics, Volume I, Chapter 35
LANGUAGE: en
SECTION: 35–6 Physiochemistry of color vision
SOURCE_URL: https://www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu/I_35.html

# 35–6 Physiochemistry of color vision

Now, what about checking these curves against actual pigments in the eye? The pigments that can be obtained from a retina consist mainly of a pigment calledvisual purple. The most remarkable features of this are, first, that it is in the eye of almost every vertebrate animal, and second, that its response curve fits beautifully with the sensitivity of the eye, as seen in Fig.35–9, in which are plotted on the same scale the absorption of visual purple and the sensitivity of the dark-adapted eye. This pigment is evidently the pigment that we see with in the dark: visual purple is the pigment for the rods, and it has nothing to do with color vision. This fact was discovered in 1877. Even today it can be said that the color pigments of the cones have never been obtained in a test tube. In 1958 it could be said that the color pigments had never been seen at all. But since that time, two of them have been detected by Rushton by a very simple and beautiful technique.
FIGURE Ch35-F9: Fig. 35–9.The sensitivity curve of the dark-adapted eye, compared with the absorption curve of visual purple.
The trouble is, presumably, that since the eye is so weakly sensitive to bright light compared with light of low intensity, it needs a lot of visual purple to see with, but not much of the color pigments for seeing colors. Rushton’s idea is toleave the pigment in the eye, and measure it anyway. What he does is this. There is an instrument called an ophthalmoscope for sending light into the eye through the lens and then focusing the light that comes back out. With it one can measure how much is reflected. So one measures the reflection coefficient of light which has gonetwicethrough the pigment (reflected by a back layer in the eyeball, and coming out through the pigment of the cone again). Nature is not always so beautifully designed. The cones are interestingly designed so that the light that comes into the cone bounces around and works its way down into the little sensitive points at the apex. The light goes right down into the sensitive point, bounces at the bottom and comes back out again, having traversed a considerable amount of the color-vision pigment; also, by looking at the fovea, where there are no rods, one is not confused by visual purple. But the color of the retina has been seen a long time ago: it is a sort of orangey pink; then there are all the blood vessels, and the color of the material at the back, and so on. How do we know when we are looking at the pigment?Answer:First we take a color-blind person, who has fewer pigments and for whom it is therefore easier to make the analysis. Second, the various pigments, like visual purple, have an intensity change when they are bleached by light; when we shine light on them they change their concentration. So, while looking at the absorption spectrum of the eye, Rushton putanotherbeam in the whole eye, which changes the concentration of the pigment, and he measured thechangein the spectrum, and the difference, of course, has nothing to do with the amount of blood or the color of the reflecting layers, and so on, but only the pigment, and in this manner Rushton obtained a curve for the pigment of the protanope eye, which is given in Fig.35–10.
FIGURE Ch35-F10: Fig. 35–10.Absorption spectrum of the color pigment of a protanope colorblind eye (squares) and a normal eye (dots).
The second curve in Fig.35–10is a curve obtained with a normal eye. This was obtained by taking a normal eye and, having already determined what one pigment was, bleaching the other one in the red where the first one is insensitive. Red light has no effect on the protanope eye, but does in the normal eye, and thus one can obtain the curve for the missing pigment. The shape of one curve fits beautifully with Yustova’s green curve, but the red curve is a little bit displaced. So perhaps we are getting on the right track. Or perhaps not—the latest work with deuteranopes does not show any definite pigment missing.
Color is not a question of the physics of the light itself. Color is asensation, and the sensation for different colors is different in different circumstances. For instance, if we have a pink light, made by superimposing crossing beams of white light and red light (all we can make with white and red is pink, obviously), we may show that white light may appear blue. If we place an object in the beams, it casts two shadows—one illuminated by the white light alone and the other by the red. For most people the “white” shadow of an object looks blue, but if we keep expanding this shadow until it covers the entire screen, we see that it suddenly appears white, not blue! We can get other effects of the same nature by mixing red, yellow, and white light. Red, yellow, and white light can produce only orangey yellows, and so on. So if we mix such lights roughly equally, we get only orange light. Nevertheless, by casting different kinds of shadows in the light, with various overlaps of colors, one gets quite a series of beautiful colors which are not in the light themselves (that is only orange), but in oursensations. We clearlyseemany different colors that are quite unlike the “physical” ones in the beam. It is very important to appreciate that a retina is already “thinking” about the light; it is comparing what it sees in one region with what it sees in another, although not consciously. What we know of how it does that is the subject of the next chapter.
bibliographyCommittee on Colorimetry, Optical Society of America,The Science of Color, Thomas Y. Crowell Company, New York, 1953.Hecht, S., S. Shlaer, andM. H. Pirenne, “Energy, Quanta, and Vision,”Journal of General Physiology, 1942,25, 819-840.Morgan, Clifford, andEliot Stellar,Physiological Psychology, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1950.Nuberg, N. D.andE. N. Yustova, “Researches on Dichromatic Vision and the Spectral Sensitivity of the Receptors of Trichromats,” presented at Symposium No. 8,Visual Problems of Colour, Vol. II, National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, England, September 1957. Published by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, London, 1958.Rushton, W. A.,“The Cone Pigments of the Human Fovea in Colour Blind and Normal,” presented at Symposium No. 8,Visual Problems of Colour, Vol. I, National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, England, September 1957. Published by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, London, 1958.Woodworth, Robert S.,Experimental Psychology, Henry Holt and Company, New York, 1938. Revised edition, 1954, by Robert S. Woodworth and H. Schlosberg.
