SOURCE: Feynman Lectures on Physics, Volume I, Chapter 7
LANGUAGE: en
SECTION: 7–3 Development of dynamics
SOURCE_URL: https://www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu/I_07.html

# 7–3 Development of dynamics

While Kepler was discovering these laws, Galileo was studying the laws of motion. The problem was, what makes the planets go around? (In those days, one of the theories proposed was that the planets went around because behind them were invisible angels, beating their wings and driving the planets forward. You will see that this theory is now modified! It turns out that in order to keep the planets going around, the invisible angels must fly in a different direction and they have no wings. Otherwise, it is a somewhat similar theory!) Galileo discovered a very remarkable fact about motion, which was essential for understanding these laws. That is the principle ofinertia—if something is moving, with nothing touching it and completely undisturbed, it will go on forever, coasting at a uniform speed in a straight line. (Whydoes it keep on coasting? We do not know, but that is the way it is.)
Newton modified this idea, saying that the only way to change the motion of a body is to useforce. If the body speeds up, a force has been appliedin the direction of motion. On the other hand, if its motion is changed to a newdirection, a force has been appliedsideways. Newton thus added the idea that a force is needed to change the speedor the directionof motion of a body. For example, if a stone is attached to a string and is whirling around in a circle, it takes a force to keep it in the circle. We have topullon the string. In fact, the law is that the acceleration produced by the force is inversely proportional to the mass, or the force is proportional to the mass times the acceleration. The more massive a thing is, the stronger the force required to produce a given acceleration. (The mass can be measured by putting other stones on the end of the same string and making them go around the same circle at the same speed. In this way it is found that more or less force is required, the more massive object requiring more force.) The brilliant idea resulting from these considerations is that notangentialforce is needed to keep a planet in its orbit (the angels do not have to fly tangentially) because the planet would coast in that direction anyway. If there were nothing at all to disturb it, the planet would go off in astraight line. But the actual motion deviates from the line on which the body would have gone if there were no force, the deviation being essentiallyat right anglesto the motion, not in the direction of the motion. In other words, because of the principle of inertia, the force needed to control the motion of a planet around the sun is not a forcearoundthe sun buttowardthe sun. (If there is a force toward the sun, the sun might be the angel, of course!)
