34–6 Classical physics gives neither diamagnetism nor paramagnetism

Now we would like to demonstrate that according to classical mechanics there can be no diamagnetism and no paramagnetism at all. It sounds crazy—first, we have proved that there are paramagnetism, diamagnetism, precessing orbits, and so on, and now we are going to prove that it is all wrong. Yes!—We are going to prove that if you follow the classical mechanics far enough, there are no such magnetic effects— they all cancel out. If you start a classical argument in a certain place and don’t go far enough, you can get any answer you want. But the only legitimate and correct proof shows that there is no magnetic effect whatever.

It is a consequence of classical mechanics that if you have any kind of system—a gas with electrons, protons, and whatever—kept in a box so that the whole thing can’t turn, there will be no magnetic effect. It is possible to have a magnetic effect if you have an isolated system, like a star held together by itself, which can start rotating when you put on the magnetic field. But if you have a piece of material that is held in place so that it can’t start spinning, then there will be no magnetic effects. What we mean by holding down the spin is summarized this way: At a given temperature we suppose that there is only one state of thermal equilibrium. The theorem then says that if you turn on a magnetic field and wait for the system to get into thermal equilibrium, there will be no paramagnetism or diamagnetism—there will be no induced magnetic moment. Proof: According to statistical mechanics, the probability that a system will have any given state of motion is proportional to e^{-U/kT} , where U is the energy of that motion. Now what is the energy of motion? For a particle moving in a constant magnetic field, the energy is the ordinary potential energy plus mv^2/2 , with nothing additional for the magnetic field. [You know that the forces from electromagnetic fields are q(\mathbf{E}+\mathbf{v}\times\mathbf{B}) , and that the rate of work \mathbf{F}\cdot\mathbf{v} is just q\mathbf{E}\cdot\mathbf{v} , which is not affected by the magnetic field.] So the energy of a system, whether it is in a magnetic field or not, is always given by the kinetic energy plus the potential energy. Since the probability of any motion depends only on the energy—that is, on the velocity and position—it is the same whether or not there is a magnetic field. For thermal equilibrium, therefore, the magnetic field has no effect. If we have one system in a box, and then have another system in a second box, this time with a magnetic field, the probability of any particular velocity at any point in the first box is the same as in the second. If the first box has no average circulating current (which it will not have if it is in equilibrium with the stationary walls), there is no average magnetic moment. Since in the second box all the motions are the same, there is no average magnetic moment there either. Hence, if the temperature is kept constant and thermal equilibrium is re-established after the field is turned on, there can be no magnetic moment induced by the field—according to classical mechanics. We can only get a satisfactory understanding of magnetic phenomena from quantum mechanics.

Unfortunately, we cannot assume that you have a thorough understanding of quantum mechanics, so this is hardly the place to discuss the matter. On the other hand, we don’t always have to learn something first by learning the exact rules and then by learning how they are applied in different cases. Almost every subject that we have taken up in this course has been treated in a different way. In the case of electricity, we wrote the Maxwell equations on “Page One” and then deduced all the consequences. That’s one way. But we will not now try to begin a new “Page One,” writing the equations of quantum mechanics and deducing everything from them. We will just have to tell you some of the consequences of quantum mechanics, before you learn where they come from. So here we go.
