SOURCE: Feynman Lectures on Physics, Volume I, Chapter 37
LANGUAGE: en
SECTION: 37–4 An experiment with electrons
SOURCE_URL: https://www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu/I_37.html

# 37–4 An experiment with electrons

FIGURE Ch37-F3: Fig. 37–3.Interference experiment with electrons.
Now we imagine a similar experiment with electrons. It is shown diagrammatically in Fig.37–3. We make an electron gun which consists of a tungsten wire heated by an electric current and surrounded by a metal box with a hole in it. If the wire is at a negative voltage with respect to the box, electrons emitted by the wire will be accelerated toward the walls and some will pass through the hole. All the electrons which come out of the gun will have (nearly) the same energy. In front of the gun is again a wall (just a thin metal plate) with two holes in it. Beyond the wall is another plate which will serve as a “backstop.” In front of the backstop we place a movable detector. The detector might be a geiger counter or, perhaps better, an electron multiplier, which is connected to a loudspeaker.
We should say right away that you should not try to set up this experiment (as you could have done with the two we have already described). This experiment has never been done in just this way. The trouble is that the apparatus would have to be made on an impossibly small scale to show the effects we are interested in. We are doing a “thought experiment,” which we have chosen because it is easy to think about. We know the results thatwouldbe obtained because therearemany experiments that have been done, in which the scale and the proportions have been chosen to show the effects we shall describe.
The first thing we notice with our electron experiment is that we hear sharp “clicks” from the detector (that is, from the loudspeaker). And all “clicks” are the same. There areno“half-clicks.”
We would also notice that the “clicks” come very erratically. Something like: click ….. click-click … click …….. click …. click-click …… click …, etc., just as you have, no doubt, heard a geiger counter operating. If we count the clicks which arrive in a sufficiently long time—say for many minutes—and then count again for another equal period, we find that the two numbers are very nearly the same. So we can speak of theaverage rateat which the clicks are heard (so-and-so-many clicks per minute on the average).
As we move the detector around, therateat which the clicks appear is faster or slower, but the size (loudness) of each click is always the same. If we lower the temperature of the wire in the gun the rate of clicking slows down, but still each click sounds the same. We would notice also that if we put two separate detectors at the backstop, oneorthe other would click, but never both at once. (Except that once in a while, if there were two clicks very close together in time, our ear might not sense the separation.) We conclude, therefore, that whatever arrives at the backstop arrives in “lumps.” All the “lumps” are the same size: only whole “lumps” arrive, and they arrive one at a time at the backstop. We shall say: “Electrons always arrive in identical lumps.”
Just as for our experiment with bullets, we can now proceed to find experimentally the answer to the question: “What is the relative probability that an electron ‘lump’ will arrive at the backstop at various distances \(x\) from the center?” As before, we obtain the relative probability by observing the rate of clicks, holding the operation of the gun constant. The probability that lumps will arrive at a particular \(x\) is proportional to the average rate of clicks at that \(x\) .
The result of our experiment is the interesting curve marked \(P_{12}\) in part (c) of Fig.37–3. Yes! That is the way electrons go.
